Lesson Four (Post Lesson Reflection)

Today, I learned about the potentiometer, which is essentially a variable resistor. Because you can change its resistance value by turning a knob, you can vary the voltage that a component or a microcontroller receives. A potentiometer has three pins. Two pins (A and B) are connected to the ends of a resistive material, like a track. The total resistance of this track is 10,000 Ohms (10k). If electricity travels from Pin A all the way to Pin B, it faces the full 10,000 Ohms of resistance. The third pin, called the wiper, moves along this resistive track. By moving the wiper closer to Pin A or Pin B, you shorten or lengthen the path the electricity has to take, which decreases or increases the resistance. One challenge is that microcontrollers like the Arduino cannot directly measure resistance, they only measure voltage. We use the potentiometer as a voltage divider to solve this. While Ohm's Law states that resistance and current are inversely related, in this specific three-pin setup, we are actually measuring the 'split' in voltage. As you turn the knob and increase the resistance between the input and the wiper, the output voltage decreases. The Arduino's Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC) then translates that voltage (0V to 5V) into a digital number (0 to 1023) that our code can actually use. So what this actually means is that if the potentiometer was turned to the max, or highest resistance, then the Arduino would give a reading of 1023 and we can use this number to code other components such as LEDs. We can also confirm that the potentiometer works by using a multimeter. The resistance value that the multimeter will give won't be exactly 10,000 Ohms because I don't have a perfect potentiometer, but it will give something relatively close to that number. I got 9,820 as my reading. Everyone will get different readings. I haven't seen a component like this before in which there are variable outputs. This is because this is an analog signals. There are other examples in history where physical movement of components or anything has been turned into data to be used. For example, there was this guy that wished to simplify the telephone circuits made by Alexander Graham Bell. To do this, he simplified the circuits and discovered something called Boolean Algebra, allowing him to create computer circuits. These computer circuits led to creating computer systems and were used for decided on after to store data. After a while, some scientists had so much data across different computers and they had no idea on how they could combine all the data. To solve this problem, Berners-Lee created pages of information that could be linked to other pages in branching networks, or webs. Pages stored in one location could be accessed on separate computer terminals. The technology for connecting computers already existed. This web made it simple to use the connections. Within a few years, the web grew from a network that only a few scientists used to the worldwide phenomenon it is today. From the lesson today, I realize that another part of engineering is using real life data and turning it into computer data or numbers to be easily retrieved. That data can come in handy in so many things other than just seeing patterns and such. I am honestly amazed at how people have managed to create such coding software and programs to compute real life data. There are even ways to compute sound as numerical data. 

Now for the vocabulary:

Baud rate – In serial communication, this is just the speed limit for how many bits of data are flying between the computer and the Arduino every second.
Bit – The absolute smallest unit of data, it’s a binary digit that can only ever be a 1 or a 0.
Byte – This is just a bundle of eight bits grouped together.
Potentiometer – A component that acts as a variable resistor, allowing me to manually turn a knob to change resistance and control the voltage in a circuit.
Scope – This defines the "territory" of a variable, or exactly where in the code that specific name is allowed to be used.
Serial monitor – A window in the IDE that lets the Arduino "talk" to me by displaying readings and information from the board on the screen.
Variable – A named container in the code that I use to hold onto information or data so I can use it later.

Now let's move on to my only circuit for the day:

So this is a parallel circuit in which the lights get dimmer as the potentiometer resists more (refer to lesson_four_dimming_lights_circuit in media). The LEDs in this circuit are wired like any other parallel circuit, they each have their own pin connected to the Arduino, and each have their own resistor. In this case, to use the potentiometer we have to connect all three of its pins. We have to connect its solo pin to an analog pin on the Arduino. We have to connect it to an analog pin because it will give us an analog signal. For the Arduino to be able to convert the Analog signals of the potentiometer into numbers, we need to connect it to an analog signals. The other two pins need to be connected to the power and to grnd. The ay that this circuit works is that the electricity first travels through the potentiometer, and then after it is resisted and decreased it goes through the LED, leading them to be dimmer than usual. Since the electricity will always go through the potentiometer first, we are able to control the brightness of the LEDs. 

Now for the code:

In the code, (refer to lesson_4_fading_LEDs_code in src) I learned one more method. Analog read. This is the method that converts the readings of the potentiometer into actual numbers. Since we are dealing with LEDs, we have to divide the value that the potentiometer gives by 4. Since the potentiometer gives values ranging from 0 - 1023, and LEDs can only take values from 0 - 255, we need to divide all values of the potentiometer by 4, allowing us to use these values to determine the brightness of LEDs. Another new thing they taught was variables. The lessons stated that variables are like boxes which hold items. The scope of a variable will always be within the method it is defined, meaning that if for example I created a variable in the setup method, I cannot use that variable outside of that method. Because of this restriction, I created the variable outside both methods, allowing me to use it in both methods. In the code, if we assign the analog Read value to a variable, we can use it to change the brightness of an LED. When using the analog Write method, it takes in two parameters, the pin number and the brightness of the LED. So far we have only talked about HIGH and LOW values for the brightness of the LEDs, which are the highest (255) and lowest (0) values possible for an LED. By limiting the range of values from the potentiometer from 0 - 255, we can create a diming effect by assigning the brightness of each LED to the value given by the potentiometer which we can change. 

A little extension to this code (refer to lesson_4_blinking_indicator_code in src) is being able to read the values of the potentiometer on the "console" which is called the Serial Monitor. To read values from the Serial Monitor, first we have to turn it on using the line "Serial.begin(9600);" in the setup method. The 9600 is the baud rate. In this case, similar to java, we have to say Serial.print or Serial.println to actually show the values on the Serial Monitor. In this case, I have the Serial Monitor show read value, the raw input from the potentiometer, then the write value, the read value divided by 4. That is the simple part though, what I actually added to the code is changing the brightness of the LED based on the value of the potentiometer. If the potentiometer gives a value of 600 or less, then only one of the LEDs will light up, and it will light up at a brightness dictated by the potentiometer. Then, if the value denoted by the potentiometer is 900 or less, two LEDs will light up and have their brightness dictated by the potentiometer. Finally, if it is anything else (>899) all the LEDs will light up and have their brightness dictated by the potentiometer. 

I honestly think this is my favorite lesson so far. The potentiometer opens up so many new possibilities of circuits I can create. It is also the most interesting one out of all the components I've used so far. I want to know the difference between analog components now. What sets the potentiometer apart from other analog components? What type of data do other Analog components record? I am about halfway done with all of my lessons, and I hope that I can get the certification by the end of these lessons.