Lesson Three (Post Lesson Reflection)

Today, I learned a lot more of the coding aspect of the Arduino. The code that I wrote was used to control "traffic lights" which are just green, yellow, and red LEDs. I don't think that coding traffic lights, with pedestrian buttons as well, is as simple as what I did today, but it still helped me freshen up my Arduino coding skills. I don't have trouble with the coding aspect of Arduino, since I have taken AP Computer Science A and Advanced Topics in Computer Science. Still, I will note down everything I learned in this lesson even though it is mostly coding. I did learn about two types of pins, namely analog and digital. Using these pins and, I can create a pseudo traffic light simulation. Of course I can't account for car crashes, traffic rates, and all those things when creating my traffic light but I can create a very rudimentary version of the lights. I honestly am still amazed at how many things us modern humans can do with just an Arduino compared to people at the time of Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla. I just like to imagine what such great inventors as these could've done if they had something just as simple as an Arduino. Imagine how much farther humanity would be in terms of technological advancements right now if the Arduino was just dropped into the hands of great inventors of the past. Thoughts like these make me feel grateful and excited for the future and the things I have now. Now let's dive into the history of traffic lights. The origin of the traffic light started all the way back when horse driven carriages were trending. There was no need for any traffic light or traffic regulation, but a certain someone named John Peake Knight felt like it would be nice. It was like he was just struck with a certain inspiration for traffic regulation, and decided he would make the first version of the traffic light. This traffic signal had to be controlled by someone in order for it to work. This traffic signal used gas lights to illuminate the signals. Unfortunately, the signal blew up and the officer was severely injured. For years after the fact, people didn't even mention traffic signal or regulation due to the danger it provides. Of course, other inventors thought it was too good of an idea to let go, so they decided to make an automated traffic regulation system in which the sign occasionally alternates between illuminates signs which say "stop" and "proceed". This system was created by an American inventor named Ernest Sirrine. After this invention, other inventors created a snowball effect in which each inventor improved on the traffic regulation system of the last. Now because of the collaboration of all these inventors we have the traffic signal we have today. These lessons really area leading me towards collaboration. The traffic signal, alternating currents, the light bulb, all these examples were only achieved through intense collaboration between parties. I honestly have had a lot of experience with collaboration but one thing to make sure of is that your partners aren't holding you back. A fun fact I learned is how the term "debugging" came to be. One day, the traffic signal algorithm wasn't working so the inventors had to tear apart everything to look for the issue, but it turned out that there was a moth stuck in one of the wires of the lights. They literally debugged the code and since then fixing issues in programming has always been referred to as debugging.

Now let's move on to the vocabulary:

Algorithm – Repeatable steps a program takes to achieve a goal, follow a command, or solve a problem.
Comparison operator – These operators define what two variables are in respect to one another, such as equal, greater than, or less than.
Compile – When the code compiles, the IDE is turning all the code I wrote into 1s and 0s which the computer can understand.
Conditional statement – A statement using comparison operators and inputs which return a true or false value.
Debug – Debugging is the process in which a programmer attempts various things to find an error and fix it in a program.
Optimization – Taking a piece of code that works and cleaning it up to make it run faster, smoother, or more efficiently.
Pseudocode – Writing out what you want the program to do in plain English before you start worrying about the actual brackets and semicolons of the coding language.
Pull-down resistor – A resistor which makes sure the component starts of as "LOW" or zero so that the circuit doesn't get confused by a randomly on component.
Threshold – The highest value or number the program can take before it takes an action or does something, anything.
Verify – The button which confirms that the computer can understand all the written code and if there are no errors.


Before we get into the actual circuit that I built, I just want to talk about analog and digital inputs. When initializing a pin in the Arduino IDE, you have to state the pin which is being turned on or recorded, then write input or output. This means that if the pin is designated as an input, that pin will only send electricity to the IDE, and if it is designated as an input, then the pin will only receive electricity from the IDE. Now that this is out of the way, we can talk about the difference between analog and digital. Digital inputs or outputs are single pulses of electricity from the component to the Arduino or vice versa. This means that digital inputs or outputs can only send or receive short bursts of electricity, limiting the range of data they can dictate. Of course, they can do things that analog inputs or outputs cannot. An example of a digital input is the press of a button. Analog inputs and outputs receive or send a constant stream of electricity which can be varied. By varied I mean the stream of electricity doesn't have to be constantly the same amount of electricity. An example of an analog input is a potentiometer. The advantage of a digital input or output is that we can use these to have the code do specific one-time actions that we have coded. Analog inputs or outputs can be used to adapt to a situation based on the reading of the component. Real-life examples of both of these are light switches and heat sensors. I wonder if there are any other types of inputs or outputs other than these two, though I doubt it. I feel using a mix of both of these in a circuit is the best way to create an interesting, complex, and fun project.

I also want to briefly talk about what is given when you open a sketch in an Arduino IDE. You get two methods, they are called void setup() and void loop(). Now what the setup method does is pretty self explanatory. It sets up all the pins and components connected to the Arduino and makes them available for usage. The loop method is also pretty self explanatory. What it does is it loops all the code inside it until the circuit turns off. These two methods work in conjunction. When you first power the Arduino, it runs setup once and then loop forever.

Now let's dive into the two circuits I made:

First was the basic traffic light (refer to lesson_three_traffic_light_circuit in media). This was a basic parallel circuit but I coded is so that the green LED lights up first while the yellow and red LEDs turn off, then the led stays on for 10s, then the yellow LED turns on while the green and the red LEDs turn off, it stays on for 1 second, then the red LED turns on while the yellow and green LEDs turn off, it stays on for 10 seconds. This circuit repeats itself for however long it is powered for. I feel like this isn't completely unrealistic but very unlikely to have ever been implemented into a traffic regulation system. If I were to improve this, I would have to get a lot more data of the road this light is on. I was talking about this earlier, since I don't have the data on the other factors that influence traffic lights, I can't make a completely accurate traffic light simulation. In the code for this (refer to lesson_3_traffic_light_code in src), I only had to use the pinMode, digitalWrite, and delay methods. The pinMode method initializes the used pins on the Arduino. The digitalWrite method decides what pin to send power to. and the delay method waits a certin ammount od milliseconds before exectuing the next line of code in the loop method. Now, to make it more interesting, I added a button which simulates a pedestrian button to the mix (refer to lesson_three_traffic_light_button_circuit in media). For this, I had to add a button to the breadboard, which has 4 pins. I only used three of them, the bottomn right which sends power to the arduino, the top right which receives power, and the bottomn left which sends the electricity back to the beginning of the cirucit. The only change to the code (refer to lesson_3_traffic_light_button_code in sec) that I had to add was the addition of an if statement. The if statement first tests if the button has send a signal, or if the button is in "HIGH" mode. If so, I turn on the green LED for half a second and then turn it off and wait for another half a second. And if the button is off, then the original code runs from before. 

I felt like this was my true first circuit due to the fact that I actually coded some components in the circuit. It was very fun if I'm going to be honest. I want more complex lessons though, I felt like this lesson was very straightforwad. I have a feeling that the next lesson will invole a lot more complex coding and wiring since this could be considered as an intro to coding in Arduino. Either way, I am enjoying my journye in this certification so far and hope to continue.