Lesson Six (Post Lesson Reflection)

I am a bit upset that I wasn't able to create the circuit in real life, leading to missed opportunities. The biggest issue that I had with wiring the circuit online was that I was only able to use non-polarized capacitators. These are much easier to use but they aren't the intended component of the lesson. They are easier because they don't have a positive and negative terminal, so you can treat any terminal as positive or negative. Some good things about Tinkercad, though, are that it is very easy to make neat wiring, and very easy to place the components. I can also now use it as a sort of circuit simulation to take another precautionary safety measure. Finding this website is a blessing in disguise honestly. Now, let's get on with what I learned today. Starting of with capacitators, the one in the lesson has a positive and a negative terminal, meaning it is polarized. A capacitator stores electric energy, somewhat like a battery. The difference, though, is that capacitators release their stored energy a lot faster than batteries do. Batteries provide a steady current to whatever they are powering, while capacitators provide a fast and un-steady current to whatever they are powering. Inside a capacitator, the terminals are connected to conductive metal plates which are separated by an insulator. The insulator that separates the plates is called a dielectric. The reason why capacitators have such a wide range of uses is because of this dielectric. A lightning storm is comparable to a capacitator. The clouds would be one conductive plate, and the ground the other. The air in between these plates is the dielectric, and when lightning strikes the cloud are discharged extremely quickly, which is the same phenomenon inside a capacitator. The measure of how much a capacitator can collect and store is called capacitance. The units for this are called farads, named after Michael Faraday. Now to wire such a component is quite simple. We wire a capacitator the same way we would an LED (refer to lesson_6_capacitator_wiring in media). After we power a capacitator, we can unplug the power and ground, then connect the multimeter to the positive and negative terminals of the capacitator to see that the capacitator is losing voltage very fast. We can even connect a capacitator to an LED, and after we remove the power to the circuit, the LED will stay lit for a couple more seconds before dimming due to the capacitator. The next thing I learned was about motors and generators. To understand how electricity generators work, I needed to first understand the relationship between electricity and magnetism. When current moves through a conductive path, such as a wire, it creates a magnetic field. Also, when there is a moving magnetic field near a wire, it can send currents through the wire. These two properties are the basis of how electricity generators work. Now for electric motors. Each electric motor is a magnet. Magnets have a north and south pole. Also inside a motor are several coils of wire. When electricity passes through the wire, it creates an electromagnet that also has a north and a south pole. Now we have two magnets, and the magnet attached to the motor will try to align itself with the magnet created by the electricity passing through the wire, causing the motor to spin. This is called electromagnetism, as I've learnt. This is how electric motors work. Now how did electric motors come to be? It has something to do with the reason that conductance is measured in Farads. As we discussed, electric motors work because there is essentially a magnet trying to align itself for however long current flows through the motor. The first version of this type of motor was created by Michael Faraday. He was considered to be an unconventional scientist because he was relatively impoverished and the son of a blacksmith. This unconventional thinking, though, is the reason why we have electric motors today. Faraday, using his own devices, realized the invisible force of magnetism, and using that he created the first ever electric motor which just spins a copper wire in circles. Because of that baseline that Faraday created, many other inventors started remodeling his motor and we continued that all the way until Tesla released their first electric car. I learned two things from this. No matter the circumstance, bright minds will always find a way to emerge. It doesn't matter if they are impoverished, lack education, or are the son of a blacksmith. Bright minds will never fail to emerge. The other thing I learned is that the base or first model of something is always the hardest to invent. As soon as Faraday created the first electric motor, the advancements in electric motors skyrocketed. The first version will always be the hardest to create. It is the same case with ChatGPT today. As soon as Open AI launched their AI, advancements in AI shot through the roof. I honestly am amazed to see this phenomenon in action in the form of Artificial Intelligence. I also hope to be part of history one day as a great Inventor.

Now for the vocab:

Actuator – A device that converts electricity or electric energy into motion or kinetic energy.
Capacitance – The measure of a component’s ability to store electric charge.
Capacitor – An electrical component that stores an electric charge.
Class – A template that describes an object. It includes variables that hold properties of an object and methods that describe what the object can do.
Constant – In programming, a value that never changes as the program runs.
Dielectric – The material in a capacitor that insulates one plate from the other.
Library – In programming, a group of functions or commands that must be imported. The functions and commands provide extra functionality and are often used with sensors and actuators.
Method – A procedure that defines the behavior of an object in a class.
Object – A specific example that belongs to a class.
Sensor – A device designed to indicate or measure something and converts that measurement, such as light or movement, to an electrical signal that a microcontroller can read.
Servo – A type of motor that includes its own driver and is used for precise positioning in either direction.

Now let's move on to the circuit of the day: The sports robot

Robotics is a very interesting and expanding field. I finally get to try my hand at a very basic version of a component of very complex robots. Robots are being built to do everything now days, but the one I will be focusing on is a sports robot, specifically its kicking mechanism (refer to lesson_6_sports_robot_circuit in media). So, to wire this we will need a potentiometer, servo motor, button, and a capacitator. The potentiometer is a sensor which will change the angle at which the ball is being kicked. The servo motor is the actuator which will rotate its top to "kick" a ball. The button is also a sensor which will tell the servo when to actually do its kicking action. Now the capacitator isn't necessary, but to be safe we need to add it. The reason for this is because of the servo. When the servo does it's motion, it takes up a lot of electricity, which might reduce the electricity going to the other components by a lot. This is, of course, not good for the other components as it might lead to damage to the components or unreliable reading from the components. How the capacitator fixes this is that it stores a certain ammount of voltage, and when the servo need it it discharges and gives the servo the extra voltage it needs to not decrease the voltage going to the other components. This works fine because the servo only leaches so much voltage when it is in motion. At rest, the servo takes near to no voltage so that isn't something we need to regulate. Now wiring is pretty simple, the other components will be wired the same but the servo will be wired differently. It has three pins, grnd, power, and input. The input will go to one of the pins on the Arduino, but the power and grnd actually come from the capacitator. The capacitator can also be thought of as a storage tank in this case since it is powering the servo just however much it needs, but not wasting the rest.

Now for the code (refer to lesson_6_sports_robot_code):

For the servo we will need to import a new library. The library just gives us methods we can use to command the servo. The only reason that we need the library is becasue Arduino doesn't have it included in all of its basic libraries. The potentiometr and button also need libraries, for example, but they are already provided. Before setup, I created a variable for the potentiometer input, button input, potentiometer value, and servo angle. For the setup method, we just need to turn on the serial moniter and run the servo.attatch method to give power and commands to the servo. Now in the loop is where it gets interesting. First I check if the button has been pressed, and if it has then we turn the servo 179 degrees. If it hasn't been pressed, we set the angle of the servo to the angle determined by the potentiometer. Now with this code, whenever the button is pressed, it will rotate 179 degrees and from it's current angle, then reset back to the an angle determined by the potentiometer. 

I found this project to be really cool, even though I had to do it online. I found it really interesting because I learned about two new components today, the capacitator and servo. I also didn't excpect to learn about motors and how they work in this lesson. Finding out about the origin of things seems to really help me understand the mechanics and limitations of mechanims. This was the first lesson in which I used an actuator, which is nice. I think the only actuator in my kit is the servo. The LED could be considered an actuator but I felt like the servo is a much better representation of an actuator. I think some examples of actuators can be DC motors which control wheels. What I'm left wondering after this is what can I do with this component. There will be a lot for me to brainstorm and think about until my next lesson. I also just found out that lesson ten is like lesson five, in which you can create whatever you'd like with the given parts. I am quite excited for that lesson.