Lesson Two (Post Lesson Reflection)

Now that my multimeter finally works, I can talk about what I learned in this lesson. So let's start of with what I learned today. As a warm up to the coding software, I was tasked to create a simple blinking LED. I became familiar with the "template" code in the Arduino IDE. There are many templates in the IDE and I chose the blinking one. I created the circuit and pushed the code to the Arduino. Then, as a little twist, I changed the delay to 3000 ms instead of 1000 ms to have the LED turn on for 3 seconds and then turn of for 3 seconds. That was a pretty simple activity though, just warming me up to the Arduino IDE. Now we get to the main part of the lesson. Proving Ohm's law. Ohm's law states that Voltage will always be equal to current times resistance in a perfect world. This isn't a perfect world though, so how do we prove this law with all the other factors such as heat loss? First we have to be able to measure the three components of Ohm's law, voltage, current, and resistance. To do this, now days we have the multimeter to help us. Back then, at the time of Donald Macadie, you would've had to use different instruments for each measurement of electricity. People say that necessity is the mother of inventions, but annoyance can also do the trick. See, Macadie needed to Voltage, current, and resistance to inspect telecommunications circuits. Genuinely just because he was annoyed at the fact that he had to use three different measuring tools to measure these three, he decided to invent the AVOmeter. First ever instrument to measure current ("A"mps), voltage ("V"olts), and resistance ("O"hms). Just because some guy was annoyed, we now have a multimeter? Isn't that crazy? Ok, anyway, back on track. The multimeter now is divided into four main parts, three of which I will be using. The side with the V= sign measures the voltage of a direct current (DC). You have to touch the two ends of the wires connected to the multimeter to the wires connecting the power to the circuit. This will tell you the voltage of the circuit. I found out that if it gives you a negative reading, and you switch the two wires around you will get a positive reading? This is because of something called Polarity. When the the current is hitting the black wire instead of the read one, the multimeter gives a negative reading since it thinks it is measuring opposite of the "conventional current". Then there is the V~ sign which measures the voltage of alternating currents. Then there is the A= sign which measures the current of the circuit. To do this, you need to place the ends of the wires connected to the multimeter where the electrons enter the component and where they exit the component to get the cirrent going through that circuit. Finally, there is the CE sign or the omega symbol which measures resistance. To measure this is the same process as voltage but you have to keep the ends of the wires at the ends of the resistor. We just have to make sure that when me measure resistance, the cirucit is not powered. Now, with all this information, we can prove Ohm's law. 

In the blinking circuit that I built, I measured the Voltage, Current, and Resistance. The voltage was 4.84V, the current was 8.8 mA, and the resistance was 540 Ohms. Now, the law states that Voltage equals Current times Resistance. If this is true, then the Current and Resistance that I have found should equal the Voltage that I have found right? Let's see.

0.0088A * 540Ω = 4.75200V

That doesnt make sense. 4.75V doesn't equal 4.84V. There is a 0.09V difference between the two. I had to research this because I was pretty surprised that the law didn't work in this case. What I found is something called tolerance. This tolarence is due to a lot of factors, but in this case it is due to Voltage drop across jumper wires, and internal resistance of the Arduino. Also, my resistor isn't perfect, it reacts to heat and manufacturing conditions. Tolerance is a range of acceptable answers for this certain measurment. The tolerance for my circuit seems to be arround +- 0.1V. Now that I think about it, if such a simple circuit is having trouble giving an exact value, how much trouble must Rocket scientists have getting exact measurments and exact voltages for their rockets. This just makes rockets so much more impressive to me. We did prove Ohm's law, but we also proved that Robotics isn't about doing work exactly as it is shown, it is about adapting to the situation and fixing your problems and wiring to your needs. What works for someone won't always work for you.

Now for the vocab for this lesson:

Conductance - Measures how easuly electrons can flow through a circuit, opposite of resistance.
Multimeter - An instrument used to collect measurments for Voltage, Current, and Resistance.
Parallel circuit - A circuit which is wired in a way such that electricity can take multiple different paths thorugh the circuit.
Schematic diagram - A diagram which represents a circuit using graphical synbols to represent each component.
Series Circuit - A circuit wired in a way such that electricity can only take one path through the circuit.
Wiring Diagram - A diagram of a circuit which uses pictures to show how components are connected.

Now the last thing that I learned today was about Series and Parallel Circuits. They both have their advantages and disadvantages. Let's start of with Series circuits.

I created two Series circuits to learn from (refer to lesson_two_series_circuit_2_LED & lesson_two_series_circuit_3_LED in media). How a series circuit is wired is that it has one path which the electricity flows through. For example, in these two images the power from the arduino goes all the way down to the resistor, then it travels through the first LED and then it travels through the wire and through the second LED. This means that the two LEDs will share the current. The same applies for the third LED. Now because of this, we have to make sure that our provided power can be equally divided into the LEDs such that the power provided to each LED is greater than 1.8V. That is just for this specific red LED. The voltage required for the LED or any component for that matter to light up is called the forward voltage. The red LED has a forward voltage of 1.8v. Now since we are providing 5V of power to be evenly distributed with the three LEDs, the LEDs won't be very bright. You can see in the images that the series circuit with 2 LEDs is brighter than the series circuit with 3 LEDs, and that is due to the way series circuits are created. Now the advanteges to this type of circuit are the costs of creating them. Imagine if we had to make a million of these circuits, the cost of even one jumper wire per circuit would be insane. Due to this, the series circuit can save money and would be simpler to wire. Also, it is easier to regulate the current, since all components would share the same current. There are disadvantages to though. If there is an issure with just one part of the circuit, the whole thing won't work. The components are not independant of each other in this case. You also can't use components which require different voltages since this type of circuit will provide the same voltage to each component. This circuit is better suited for big builds which are simple in nature.

Now for the parallel circuit.

I created one parallel circuit to learn from (refer to lesson_two_parallel_circuit_2_LED in media). How a parallel circuit is wired is that it has multiple paths in which electricity can flow through. This allows the same voltage to be applied to each current. For example, in the image I showed, the electricity goes through both the resistors, so the LEDs have two seperate currents running through them. This allows the 5V to power the LEDs as much as they need to be bright. In the image you can clearly see tht the LEDs are brighter compared to the series circuit. Since the forward voltage for both LEDs are being fulfilled, they both will be at maximum brightness. This type of circuit will allow me to add as many LEDs as I want and they will all be at maximum brightness. The drawback though is that if I add to many LEDs then the Arduino will try to pull an ammount of current which it cannot handle, so it may pop a fuse or overheat. Another advantage to this is that if one component decided it doesn't want to work, the others won't stop working. All the components in this type of circuit are independent of each other, so one component shutting down will not crash  the entire circuit. It has its disadvantages though. If we do add too many components to the circuit, the circuit may overheat and burn. It is a little dangerous to work with these type of circuits. It also is more complex to wire and requires more materials so in larger circuits it wouldn't be preferable. 

Now I love to use concrete examples to compliment my understanding so I found the Voltages of the two types of circuits using my multimeter, and what do you know? The voltage of the LEDs in the series cirucuit with 2 LEDs is 1.82 and the voltage for LEDs in the series circuit with 3 LEDs is 1.64, while the voltage for LEDs in the parallel circuit with two LEDs is 1.87. This crearly shows that parallel circuits would be better in smaller projects.

This lesson was very interesting but also exauhsting to write about. There was so much to learn! And this is only lesson 2. I am excited for the next one, see you next time!